You know, everyone is just more comfortable with it.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Welcome to lecture 14.
NOTE CONF
Uh, today is again about biases in decision making.
You probably remember that we talked about biases yesterday.
NOTE CONF
And in particular we looked at what's called the framing
effect.
NOTE CONF
And we looked at one particular way of explaining it
which was prospect theory.
NOTE CONF
So today we're not going to talk about prospect theory,
but we're going to talk about other biases in decision
NOTE CONF
making and how we could possibly explain those.
Um, let's get started just with a quick recap.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so last time we saw rational rational analysis, which
is not a theory, but is a framework for cognitive
NOTE CONF
modelling, where the assumption is that you think about what
the optimal the rational behaviour would be in a certain
NOTE CONF
situation to solve a certain task.
What kind of data would you need?
NOTE CONF
What kind of environment would you operate in?
How would you test your evidence?
NOTE CONF
How do you make a decision, and so on.
And you try to formulate this in an optimal way.
NOTE CONF
And then the next step is to look at data
from human participants and see to what extent that deviates
NOTE CONF
from the optimal, the rational way.
And that's been a successful approach in the field for
NOTE CONF
the last 20 or so years.
We looked at one example, which was decisions under uncertainty,
NOTE CONF
where you have a bet and you have a certain
chance of winning or losing.
NOTE CONF
And how much attention do you pay to probabilities?
Do you compute expected values?
NOTE CONF
It turns out that straight expected values as we know
them from probability theory, are not able to explain the
NOTE CONF
human behaviour in this situation.
And we've seen another approach called prospect theory, which is
NOTE CONF
based on expected value but also makes additional assumptions.
Today we are going to look at other cognitive biases,
NOTE CONF
not just the framing effect.
Um, cognitive bias, just to remind you, is a is
NOTE CONF
a deviation from the optimal normatively correct behaviour from the
rules of logic or the rules of probability?
NOTE CONF
Uh, if humans behave differently, then we're talking about a
bias, a cognitive bias.
NOTE CONF
This was different from the inductive biases we saw earlier
in the course, for example in language acquisition.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So for example, if you choose a bet, a bet
NOTE CONF
is preferred even though it doesn't have the optimal expected
gain.
NOTE CONF
Then that would be an example of a cognitive bias.
Uh, we've seen the framing effects as I mentioned.
NOTE CONF
So these were uh, expressed in terms of joint bets
where you have to make two bets.
NOTE CONF
One is typically about gains, the other one is typically
about losses.
NOTE CONF
And people choose the Non-optimal option in both cases.
And it turns out how the bed is framed matters.
NOTE CONF
That's why it's called a framing effect.
So if I present it in terms of expected values,
NOTE CONF
expected gains and losses, then people make the optimal decision.
But if it's framed in in another way, in terms
NOTE CONF
of surer gains or surer losses, then people don't behave
in an optimal way.
NOTE CONF
And the expectation we've seen is that.
So people evaluate about it at a time, and they
NOTE CONF
have a utility function which doesn't focus on the overall
wealth but on gains and losses.
NOTE CONF
And we've seen that gains seem to be more important
than losses.
NOTE CONF
So if you have a utility function or a value
function here, then first of all you can see that
NOTE CONF
the gains the utility flattens out.
So there's diminishing returns.
NOTE CONF
And the curve is steeper for losses.
So losses have a more substantial effect than gains of
NOTE CONF
the same value.
And there's also here a larger period of the curve
NOTE CONF
where this is a linear or nearly linear effect.
The other thing we've seen is that people tend to
NOTE CONF
overweight extreme probabilities.
So really low probabilities or really high probabilities.
NOTE CONF
People are something people are attracted to and they overestimate
how probable it is.
NOTE CONF
For example, to die in a plane crash or to
win the lottery.
NOTE CONF
Right?
These are really, really low probability events.
NOTE CONF
But people overestimate, uh, overestimate the probability.
And we'll talk about why in today's lecture.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, more examples of cognitive biases today.
Um, and then we will reflect a little bit on
NOTE CONF
why these biases arise.
So it could be that something's wrong with the experiment.
NOTE CONF
And the experiment actually thought that there was an optimal
solution.
NOTE CONF
But the participants actually they interpret the experiment differently.
So it could be a problem with that.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it's also important not to forget that humans
operate under resource limits.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We have a limited amount of time, limited amount of
NOTE CONF
memory, computational limitations and so on.
So maybe it's a resource optimal decision.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Given given the constraints we're operating under rather than a
NOTE CONF
globally optimal decision that we would be able to arrive
at if we didn't have any constraints in terms of
NOTE CONF
compute, memory and so on.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's start with the bias though.
And uh, this is again from Tversky and Kahneman.
NOTE CONF
Uh, here's a description of of a person.
So Bill is 34 years old.
NOTE CONF
He's intelligent but unimaginative, compulsive, generally lifeless.
In school he was strong in mathematics, but weakened social
NOTE CONF
studies and humanities.
And then we have a bunch of statements.
NOTE CONF
And to ask in Kahneman, they asked participants to rate
how to rank, sorry, to rank the statements in order
NOTE CONF
of how likely they are to be true of of
Bill.
NOTE CONF
So Bill is a physician who plays poker for hobby.
Bill is an architect.
NOTE CONF
Bill is an accountant.
Bill plays jazz for hobby.
NOTE CONF
Serves for hobby as a reporter.
Is an accountant who plays jazz, climbs mountains for a
NOTE CONF
hobby, and so on.
And so let's focus on these statements here.
NOTE CONF
Bill is an accountant.
Bill place jazz for a hobby.
NOTE CONF
And then the conjunction of those two claims.
Bill is an accountant and plays jazz for a hobby.
NOTE CONF
And, um, let's call the first statement A, the jazz
statement J and then the conjunction A and J.
NOTE CONF
And I'm using this very simple logical notation here where
this is an and a, not an a logical implication.
NOTE CONF
So most people think that, um, Bill is an accountant
who plays jazz for a hobby is more likely than
NOTE CONF
Bill plays jazz for a hobby.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Um, and that seems to be a fallacy, right?
Because obviously, the set of the set of jazz playing
NOTE CONF
accountants is a subset of the jazz players.
Right?
NOTE CONF
So, um, there's this is strictly more likely than this.
But people still think that somehow being an accountant who
NOTE CONF
plays jazz is more likely than just being a just
playing jazz.
NOTE CONF
Um, and this is, of course, because this description that
we're giving up here, uh, is, You know, stereotypical description
NOTE CONF
of an accountant.
Okay, so, uh, people don't seem to, uh, to deal
NOTE CONF
with these conjunctions in the expected way.
And this is sometimes called the conjunction fallacy.
NOTE CONF
Um, more specifically, uh, there is a bias towards a
representative.
NOTE CONF
Uh, answer.
So if we come up with a description here that
NOTE CONF
is typical of an accountant, then people will pick out
the accountant, but they will also pick out accountant and
NOTE CONF
something else.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Which is, strictly speaking, the wrong answer, because it's less
likely that you're an accountant and something else.
NOTE CONF
But compared to just an accountant.
So this is called the representative.
NOTE CONF
Uh, bias.
And, uh, the explanation is that the description is representative
NOTE CONF
of being an accountant.
And what's going on under the hood is in probabilistic
NOTE CONF
terms, is that the probability of the description given the
category.
NOTE CONF
So description is the text that we've seen and the
category is accountant is high.
NOTE CONF
Right.
If it's an accountant category then you're likely to describe
NOTE CONF
it like that.
But here of course we are inferring the opposite.
NOTE CONF
We are inferring the probability of the category given the
description.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So in this task participants were given the description.
NOTE CONF
And then they had to guess the category.
So uh, people somehow seem to reason that this here,
NOTE CONF
which is the likelihood is the same as the posterior,
right.
NOTE CONF
If you think about it in Bayesian terms, then, uh,
of course, the probability of x given Y is not
NOTE CONF
the same as the probability of y given x.
And what's the difference between those terms?
NOTE CONF
It's the prior right.
If we were to compute the posterior here then we
NOTE CONF
would need to take the prior into account.
But people don't seem to be able to do that.
NOTE CONF
And this is sometimes called base rate neglect.
It's something we'll come back to later in this lecture.
NOTE CONF
So there's a bunch of things going on.
First of all, the fact that the description is representative
NOTE CONF
of a certain category, but also the fact that people
don't seem to be able to distinguish between likelihoods, this
NOTE CONF
probability and posteriors.
This probability.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's try to estimate some probabilities ourselves.
NOTE CONF
So if you scan the QR code, um, you will
get a, uh, a short probability estimation exercise.
NOTE CONF
And here's the code again.
Okay, let's get started.
NOTE CONF
Here is a few causes of death.
Sorry, this is slightly morose, and you're supposed to order
NOTE CONF
them by probability.
So starting with the most likely going down to the
NOTE CONF
least likely cause of death.
Is most likely at the top or bottom.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's at the top, I think.
Let me quickly check.
NOTE CONF
I'll turn off my screen so that you don't see
the.
NOTE CONF
Oh.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Most likely at the top, please.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
Wrong button.
So sorry.
NOTE CONF
Most likely at the top.
Of that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
I don't.
Think.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
All.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Thank you.
NOTE CONF
So.
Much.
NOTE CONF
Thank.
You very.
NOTE CONF
Much.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
I seem to have managed to reset the projector.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
42 answers.
NOTE CONF
Great.
So let's have a look at, first of all, what
NOTE CONF
you thought.
Okay, so five people say car accident, bike accident, drowning
NOTE CONF
accident, shark attack, car accident, bike accident.
Okay, so people don't really like cars and bikes.
NOTE CONF
Um, shark is always last, which is great.
Cars?
NOTE CONF
Always first.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So this is actually pretty good.
Let's have a look at the correct answer.
NOTE CONF
So car accident maybe.
Not surprising then.
NOTE CONF
Poisoning seems to be really frequent.
Drowning also bike accident.
NOTE CONF
Uh, air slash.
So the statistics I have taken this from says air
NOTE CONF
slash space accident.
I'm not quite sure what the space accident is, but,
NOTE CONF
hey, um.
Train crash.
NOTE CONF
Unlikely.
Shark attack.
NOTE CONF
Really unlikely.
Okay, um, so what this is supposed to demonstrate, um,
NOTE CONF
is that people have a bias called the availability bias.
So I mean, you obviously didn't fall for this, but.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Question.
NOTE CONF
Explain why the representation bias is about.
Is it a policy because it sounds correct.
NOTE CONF
You're taking information you've gathered from data and applying it.
That's right.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Let's let's go back.
Uh.
NOTE CONF
You mean this one?
The representativeness bias?
NOTE CONF
Um.
It is.
NOTE CONF
Is it incorrect?
So it depends on the situation, right?
NOTE CONF
So in in this situation, it leads to an incorrect
outcome because it overrides other factors.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So here if I just choose accountant then that's great
NOTE CONF
because the, uh, the description is representative of being an
accountant.
NOTE CONF
But then people also think that being an accountant who
plays jazz is more likely than just playing jazz.
NOTE CONF
And that would be a fallacy then, because the representativeness
of the description overrides the logical rule that if something
NOTE CONF
is a subset, then it's less likely than the superset,
right?
NOTE CONF
Because people who play jazz are a superset of people
who are accountants and play jazz.
NOTE CONF
So people get that.
Uh, people make that mistake, right?
NOTE CONF
This is a sort of specific fallacy, the conjunction fallacy,
which is caused by the representativeness bias.
NOTE CONF
And in not in all cases, the representativeness bias causes
problems.
NOTE CONF
But here in this particular case where they even though
something is, you know, provably less likely, they still find
NOTE CONF
it more likely because it's representative.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, sorry, I probably didn't explain this very well.
But moving on to the next bias, and this is
NOTE CONF
sort of based on the observation that people find things
that are, um, that are unlikely, but highly available.
NOTE CONF
They find this.
They overestimate the probability.
NOTE CONF
So train crashes.
Plane crashes.
NOTE CONF
These are heavily reported in the media when they happen.
Terrorist attacks, school shootings and so on.
NOTE CONF
Even though these are all low probability events, they are
highly available because of media reporting.
NOTE CONF
Car crashes, on the other hand, are very, very frequent
and they're not reported in the media in most cases.
NOTE CONF
So they're less available.
And in comparison we underestimate the probability of car crashes.
NOTE CONF
So that's the argument here.
Here's another example which is maybe.
NOTE CONF
So the probability is generated by just trying to remember
examples.
NOTE CONF
That's the claim here.
Here's another example.
NOTE CONF
So consider the letter r.
So is R more likely to appear in the first
NOTE CONF
position of a word or in the third position of
a word.
NOTE CONF
So most participants think first position is more likely if
you actually count it in a body of text.
NOTE CONF
Then the third position is more likely, but the first
position is just much more available.
NOTE CONF
Right.
If I asked you name ten words that start with
NOTE CONF
R, you can probably easily do this.
If I ask you name ten words where the third
NOTE CONF
letters are.
That is actually really hard, right?
NOTE CONF
So it is something with being available in memory being
easy to recall.
NOTE CONF
And we're biased towards events or in this case lexical
items that are easy to remember and easy to recall.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is called availability bias.
NOTE CONF
Um, and again just like with the representativeness bias, it
is a useful heuristic.
NOTE CONF
And it works in a lot of cases.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Something is highly available because it's very frequent most of
the time.
NOTE CONF
You're maybe find it easier to, uh, to categorise dogs
compared to, I don't know, marsupials, uh, because you've seen
NOTE CONF
hundreds of dogs, but you've only seen a few marsupials
in the zoo or something like that, right?
NOTE CONF
So there's an availability bias, which influences how good you
are at making a certain judgement.
NOTE CONF
And there is actually a research area which is called
inference by sampling, where you estimate probabilities by sampling and
NOTE CONF
seeing how frequent an event are, an event is.
And so it's probably true that we are using that
NOTE CONF
to some extent.
And if something is available, like the dog example, you
NOTE CONF
have lots of examples of dogs to draw upon.
Then probably that means it is actually more likely.
NOTE CONF
Right?
So if you take a new animal is more likely
NOTE CONF
to be a dog than, uh, a marsupial, And also
extreme events are often, uh, important ones.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So in in a plane crash, this is a very
NOTE CONF
important event.
Lots of people die if a plane crashes.
NOTE CONF
So, um, you the utility, right?
The losses or the gains are often very large for
NOTE CONF
these low frequency events.
Just like a lottery win, right?
NOTE CONF
The probability is really low, but it is a and
a very important event okay.
NOTE CONF
And so that has to do with this idea that
we overestimate highly probable or highly improbable uh, events.
NOTE CONF
So that probably also plays into this availability bias.
Uh, if you want the the probabilities, the odds actually.
NOTE CONF
Here's the link for the shark attacks.
Comparison to all other causes of death.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's look at another bias.
And this goes back to Bayesian reasoning.
NOTE CONF
If you remember Bayes rule where we compute a posterior
probability based on a prior and a likelihood term.
NOTE CONF
It turns out people also struggle with that.
And there's a well-known example here.
NOTE CONF
Goes back also to Kahneman and also to Berkeley Hillel.
So they have the following example.
NOTE CONF
So let's assume in a city we have two types
of cubs, 80% of the cubs are blue, 15% are
NOTE CONF
green, and one of the cubs is involved in a
hit and run.
NOTE CONF
It's happening at night.
So there's a witness.
NOTE CONF
But the witness isn't entirely sure.
But the witness claims it's a green cab that was
NOTE CONF
involved in the accident.
And then the police does some tests and they find
NOTE CONF
out that the witness is correct 80% of the time
when they're given, let's say a picture of a cop
NOTE CONF
and it's in the lighting is the way it was
at the time of the accident.
NOTE CONF
So it's at night.
So you're not 100% sure when you're recognising the colour.
NOTE CONF
So and then from this you're supposed to infer was
the cab involved in the hit and run, was it
NOTE CONF
green or blue.
So most people say green.
NOTE CONF
That's the typical judgement.
But of course we have learned how to compute this
NOTE CONF
using Bayes rule.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Because we're given a few numbers here.
This here is basically our prior probability, right?
NOTE CONF
Overall, without any witness, any more information, what's the probability
that the cab is green.
NOTE CONF
It's 15%.
What's the probability that it's blue.
NOTE CONF
It's 85%.
That's our prior probability.
NOTE CONF
And this here the witness is correct 80% of the
time.
NOTE CONF
That is our likelihood.
So given that the cab is really green.
NOTE CONF
How likely is it that the witness says it's green
and this number is 80%?
NOTE CONF
How likely is it that they're mistaken and they identify
it as blue?
NOTE CONF
It's 20%.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is our likelihood here.
And so we can plug this into Bayes rule.
NOTE CONF
So we're computing the probability of green given that the
witness says green.
NOTE CONF
So the witness is correct.
And that would be the prior probability that the car
NOTE CONF
is green times the probability that the witness says green
given that it is green right.
NOTE CONF
This is the likelihood.
This is the posterior.
NOTE CONF
Note the inversion of the conditional here.
That's what we're trying to achieve.
NOTE CONF
And then we're dividing by the probability of the data.
So that would be the probability of green given the
NOTE CONF
witness says it's green.
And the probability of blue given that the witness says
NOTE CONF
it's blue, that it's witnesses green.
But the cab is really blue.
NOTE CONF
And then we work this out.
This is 15% times 80% up here and then down
NOTE CONF
here 15 times 80 plus 85 times 20.
Right.
NOTE CONF
The complement the complement of the probabilities.
And that works out as 0.41.
NOTE CONF
So it's actually less likely than 50% that the car
is the cab is green.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So the correct answer would actually be blue.
NOTE CONF
And but people say green.
And the question is why.
NOTE CONF
So the traditional explanation for this is something called base
rate neglect.
NOTE CONF
So that's a cognitive bias where people don't take the
base rate into account.
NOTE CONF
Base rate is just a fancy name for prior right?
So if you don't take the prior into account here,
NOTE CONF
then of course the posterior is the same as the
likelihood.
NOTE CONF
So it's 80%.
So of course you're going to say green.
NOTE CONF
So that is the what is claimed to be the
fallacy here.
NOTE CONF
And um yeah.
So participants ignore the prior.
NOTE CONF
Ignore the base rate.
And what's the explanation for this now?
NOTE CONF
Well, in the literature.
So Barrell says we have a heuristic that determines the
NOTE CONF
relevance of the information.
Kahneman would say the green cup is more representative of
NOTE CONF
the witnesses report, so they don't really have a very
good explanation.
NOTE CONF
Um, the phenomenon is important because you see it in
other cases, too.
NOTE CONF
So most concerningly, perhaps, is that doctors make the same
mistake, and there's a bunch of experiments showing this where
NOTE CONF
the base rate would be the prevalence of a disease,
uh, let's say prevalence of a certain form of skin
NOTE CONF
cancer, uh, is 1 in 1000, say.
So that's a base rate.
NOTE CONF
That's a prior probability.
And then you have a diagnostic test.
NOTE CONF
But of course a the diagnostic test is one that
is not 100% accurate typically.
NOTE CONF
So you assume the test is accurate.
I don't know 90% of the time when there is
NOTE CONF
a cancer, it gives a positive result.
That would be your likelihood.
NOTE CONF
And so based on that you can use Bayes rule
in the same way right.
NOTE CONF
You have the probability of skin cancer.
You have the probability that the test is uh gives
NOTE CONF
gives an accurate uh, gives a positive result given that
there is skin cancer.
NOTE CONF
And then you can compute the posterior.
So that's how you should reason about these things.
NOTE CONF
But doctors make the same mistake.
They don't take the uh the likelihood into account sorry.
NOTE CONF
The prior into account.
They only compute this based on the on the likelihood.
NOTE CONF
In legal settings, it's often the case.
I mean, this is really a legal case that we
NOTE CONF
saw with the cabs, right?
You could imagine a jury having to decide whether.
NOTE CONF
How likely is it that this was really a green
cab?
NOTE CONF
Given that we have a witness, a witness is 80%
accurate.
NOTE CONF
And then there's the tendency to say, yes, it was
a green cab, ignoring the base rate, ignoring the fact
NOTE CONF
that green cabs are quite rare.
Okay, so let's maybe take stock and look at the
NOTE CONF
biases that we've seen so far.
So there's another quick quiz.
NOTE CONF
So here on the left side we have a number
of observations.
NOTE CONF
Um and on the right side we have a number
of uh biases that could potentially explain those observations.
NOTE CONF
So we have availability bias base rate neglect, framing effect
representative bias.
NOTE CONF
And then here on the left side People prefer certain
gains, even if they don't result in the best expected
NOTE CONF
value.
Um.
NOTE CONF
A student is more likely to be judged to study
physics rather than to study science.
NOTE CONF
People overestimate the probability of events that appear in the
news a lot.
NOTE CONF
Or, uh, if we interpret a test result, we don't
think about the prevalence of the disease.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So when interpreting a test result the prevalence of the
NOTE CONF
disease is ignored.
So this is the base rate neglect.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
And we we just talked about this that people are
NOTE CONF
quite bad at making use of prior probabilities.
They focus too much on the likelihood when they draw
NOTE CONF
an inference.
Given the detailed description, student is judged to be more
NOTE CONF
likely to study physics than to study science.
That would be representative bias.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, that's correct, because obviously it's more likely that someone
studies study science, right?
NOTE CONF
Because physics is a science, but there's lots of other
sciences.
NOTE CONF
So it's a subset.
But maybe our description is such that somehow it's very
NOTE CONF
typical for a physicist rather than, say, a chemist or
a biologist.
NOTE CONF
So that would be representative bias.
Um, overestimates the probability of events that appear frequently in
NOTE CONF
the news.
That would be availability bias.
NOTE CONF
Right.
If you've encountered something very frequently or you've seen it
NOTE CONF
in your daily life, you've seen it in the news.
It's being reported upon all the time.
NOTE CONF
Then it's more available.
It's easier to access.
NOTE CONF
You overestimate the probability.
So it's essentially something to do with memory.
NOTE CONF
How easily you remember something.
And then finally frame your effect.
NOTE CONF
People prefer certain gains even when they don't result in
the best expected value.
NOTE CONF
So this depends on how the problem is framed.
If I frame it in, you have a certain loss
NOTE CONF
of 100, or you have a certain gain of 25,
then this overrides people's, uh, probabilistic reasoning.
NOTE CONF
If I frame it in terms of this bet has
an expected value of 20, this bet has an expected
NOTE CONF
value of 30.
Then people can do it right.
NOTE CONF
So it depends on how the problem is framed.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
These are just the yeah, most of you got this
correct.
NOTE CONF
Very good.
And.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So, uh, for the rest of the lecture, I have
NOTE CONF
one more puzzle.
Um, it's not a cognitive bias in the traditional sense.
NOTE CONF
But before that I would quickly.
Talk a little bit about reading.
NOTE CONF
Just take a moment.
Um, so the reading I've only said this one paper
NOTE CONF
as the reading for today and for yesterday.
But if you have some time over Flexible Learning Week,
NOTE CONF
this is a really good book to have a look
at.
NOTE CONF
It's called Thinking Fast and Slow.
It's by Kahneman himself.
NOTE CONF
It's very accessible.
And uh, if you look in particular on at the
NOTE CONF
second and the fourth part in the book, um, he
has many more biases than we have seen in the
NOTE CONF
lectures.
So if that's something you find fascinating.
NOTE CONF
So for example, there's the halo effect.
The halo effect is when you see that someone is
NOTE CONF
competent and Spoken, um, and uh, for example, interviews.
Well, then you think they are also good at their
NOTE CONF
job.
So the someone who's just, you know, a nice person
NOTE CONF
and well-spoken and maybe well-dressed as well.
Then they built up this halo, and people infer that
NOTE CONF
they're competent.
So you overestimate someone's competence.
NOTE CONF
And this is called the halo effect.
And that's just one of the biases that people have
NOTE CONF
studied.
We've only seen 4 or 5 in this course.
NOTE CONF
But if you want to find out a little bit
more, Kahneman also has a whole theoretical framework where there's
NOTE CONF
two cognitive systems called system one and system two.
System one is fast and making heuristic judgements, which are
NOTE CONF
sometimes wrong, where systems two is slow, deliberative thinking less
likely to biases, and less likely to make mistakes.
NOTE CONF
So he has this whole framework anyway.
So if you want to go beyond a little bit
NOTE CONF
of what the course is, uh, what I'm covering here.
So.
NOTE CONF
But let's look at a particular puzzle, which is called
the Watson card selection task.
NOTE CONF
Um, and it goes like this.
So you have a bunch of cards, they have numbers,
NOTE CONF
uh, or letters on them.
So here we have E27.
NOTE CONF
And you're given a rule as well.
The rule is if there's a vowel on one side
NOTE CONF
of the card, then there's an even number on the
other side.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we have two types of uh letters.
NOTE CONF
We have vowels and consonants.
And we have two types of numbers even in odd
NOTE CONF
numbers.
And you're supposed to turn over the cards that allow
NOTE CONF
you to test if this rule is true.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And.
So logic dictates that what you're supposed to do is,
NOTE CONF
uh, turn over E and seven E is pretty clear,
right?
NOTE CONF
It has a vowel on one side.
So I can I can test whether it's an even
NOTE CONF
number on the other side.
Seven I need to turn over because of the inverse
NOTE CONF
of this, right.
It has an odd number.
NOTE CONF
So the other if I find, uh, um.
If I find a vowel on the other side, then
NOTE CONF
the rule is incorrect.
So both allow you to, uh, disprove the rule.
NOTE CONF
What people do is, though, um.
Oh, yeah.
NOTE CONF
So this explains what I've just said.
So we will write this as, uh, p and not
NOTE CONF
Q, right.
E and seven seven is not an even number, so
NOTE CONF
it's an odd number.
So that would be P and this would be not
NOTE CONF
Q.
Uh, and uh, rather than, for example, turning over x
NOTE CONF
or two, which would be not P and Q.
So um.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So it would be this one.
NOTE CONF
And here.
And the rule is that p I have a vowel
NOTE CONF
on one side implies q, and I have an even
number on the other side.
NOTE CONF
So if we flip over the e and we see
an odd number, then we have falsified the rule.
NOTE CONF
If we flip over the seven and we see a
vowel, then we have also falsified the rule, right?
NOTE CONF
So there's no way of actually confirming the rule.
But by turning over these two cards, we can falsify
NOTE CONF
the rule.
People, however, they, uh, they tend to pick, uh, some
NOTE CONF
of the other cards.
So if you, for example, take the X, then it
NOTE CONF
doesn't matter if the number is even odd, right?
It cannot falsify the rule because x is a consonant.
NOTE CONF
And if we flip over the two, then again it
doesn't matter if there's a vowel or not.
NOTE CONF
On the other side, it doesn't falsify the rule because
it's an even number.
NOTE CONF
And this is when you actually run an experiment and
you ask participants which rules they take, which cards they
NOTE CONF
take, then p and Q is the most common.
So q here is two, so e and two.
NOTE CONF
And then a certain number also just turn over e.
But the correct answer here p and not q is
NOTE CONF
very small one out of 34 0.34 and not P
obviously doesn't doesn't make sense.
NOTE CONF
But one person did it anyway.
And then you had four.
NOTE CONF
Who did?
P and Q and not Q, which again is a
NOTE CONF
contradiction.
So that shouldn't happen.
NOTE CONF
And p and not p.
And q is one out of 34.
NOTE CONF
And then there's one two that turned over everything.
So um.
NOTE CONF
The important thing is that people either only turn over
the P, or they turn over the P and the
NOTE CONF
Q, and that is the correct the incorrect answer, because
the Q doesn't really tell you anything, right?
NOTE CONF
P fair enough.
But Q doesn't tell you anything.
NOTE CONF
So, uh, what is going on?
How could we explain this behaviour?
NOTE CONF
So way back in the day and this is an
old experiment.
NOTE CONF
Uh, he said that this requires some knowledge of logic.
You need to reason in terms of logical rules.
NOTE CONF
But that's not what people do.
People are really bad at these logical rules and at
NOTE CONF
formal operations in general.
That was his explanation.
NOTE CONF
And that is obviously a statement of, you know, this
is how things are and it's not an explanation.
NOTE CONF
Right?
It's not a very good way of, uh, of dealing
NOTE CONF
with this particular finding.
So people have been trying to understand what's going on
NOTE CONF
ever since.
And there's various various ways of explaining this.
NOTE CONF
And let's maybe try quickly whether we can use our
biases that we've seen to explain this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So we go back here.
NOTE CONF
Here's all the biases we've seen in the course.
Do you think one of these biases could explain the
NOTE CONF
fact that people are not really able to reason logically
in the Ways and cards Card selection task.
NOTE CONF
Could it be the framing effect, availability bias, representative bias,
and so on?
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's have a look.
Framing effect.
NOTE CONF
So 20% thought framing effect.
Um.
NOTE CONF
Does anyone want to explain framing effect?
Why?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Um, actually, this information is flexible.
So that you think that if you apply the second
NOTE CONF
set of about 20s.
Maybe next week or two more.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
So the explanation, let me just repeat it, is that
NOTE CONF
it's something about information gain.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So turning over the first card gives a certain amount
of information.
NOTE CONF
And then maybe you don't need the second card anymore.
So it's really about maximising some form of informativeness out
NOTE CONF
of the data rather than following logical rules.
And this is actually this is an explanation that has
NOTE CONF
been advanced in the literature.
And I'll talk about this briefly at the end.
NOTE CONF
So um, in general, it turns out that how the
problem is formulated is important.
NOTE CONF
So if I give you an abstract rule, like there's
a vowel on one side and an even number on
NOTE CONF
the other side, then this is really hard for people.
If I give you a familiar rule, like if you're
NOTE CONF
over 16, you're allowed to drink alcohol, Then people are
actually quite good at reasoning with examples like this.
NOTE CONF
So that is also an aspect of the framing, right?
How familiar is the situation and how is it?
NOTE CONF
Can you relate it to an everyday situation.
So that would be a type of framing effect.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe it's availability right.
If you've encountered rules like this before and you think
NOTE CONF
about implications like a if A then B all the
time, then maybe you find this easier.
NOTE CONF
So it could be availability as well.
Representativeness I'm not sure.
NOTE CONF
Base rate neglect I'm also not sure because there's no
probabilities given a priori.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So maybe if we know that vowels and consonants are
NOTE CONF
not the same probability, then something like base rate could
come in.
NOTE CONF
Conjunction fallacy could be because people don't seem to be
able to, uh, to, you know, to to deal with
NOTE CONF
these logical conjunctions that we've seen.
Um, it's basically.
NOTE CONF
Uh, p is okay, and P and Q is okay.
But then if you have a negative and here you
NOTE CONF
even have a contradiction, right?
P and not P.
NOTE CONF
Um, so things maybe that is one aspect of logical
reasoning that people find hard rather than saying they are
NOTE CONF
bad at formal operations in general.
Okay, so none of these explanations are entirely convincing.
NOTE CONF
And as I said, there's a long sort of tradition
of research there.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at one particular, um, alternative explanation.
Uh, so there's basically two competing hypotheses, right?
NOTE CONF
If you write this the rule down as an implication.
If P, then q can either be true or can
NOTE CONF
be false.
And maybe we're actually interested in finding out the most
NOTE CONF
information, the information that we need.
And this is a bit what your colleague said.
NOTE CONF
Finding out how to falsify this rule.
Right.
NOTE CONF
And if we have one bit of information that might
already be enough and we can stop.
NOTE CONF
So and in particular, we don't only want to say
this is evidence against the rule, we also want evidence
NOTE CONF
for the rule.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So people.
That's the claim here.
NOTE CONF
And this is a paper here by Oxford and Charter.
They don't just want to falsify.
NOTE CONF
They also want to verify.
I mean a scientist where we're trained to think in
NOTE CONF
terms of falsification.
But maybe that's not true in everyday situations.
NOTE CONF
Here's an example.
If you eat tripe P, then you feel sick.
NOTE CONF
So this is not abstract with vowels and Consonants and
even in odd numbers.
NOTE CONF
But it's an everyday situation, and here p and not
p would correspond to.
NOTE CONF
Hello tripe eater.
How do you feel?
NOTE CONF
Right.
So are you sick or not?
NOTE CONF
And Q and not Q would be hello sick person
or well person.
NOTE CONF
Have you had tripe recently?
That would be the the equivalent in this real world
NOTE CONF
situation.
And then we can come up with two policies either
NOTE CONF
P and Q which would be Alice's.
Call it Alice's policy.
NOTE CONF
Ask the tripe eaters how they feel.
Right?
NOTE CONF
Are they sick or not?
And then secondly, ask sick people if maybe recently they've
NOTE CONF
been they've been eating tripe and that's why they got
sick.
NOTE CONF
Whereas Bob has a strict logical approach here of P
and not Q.
NOTE CONF
Ask eaters how they feel and ask well people if
well people if they have eaten tripe recently.
NOTE CONF
So which policy seems more reasonable here?
Probably it's Alice's policy, right?
NOTE CONF
Because talking to the sick people is bound to be
more informative.
NOTE CONF
And there's a lot fewer of them probably, than, well,
people.
NOTE CONF
So just randomly asking people that are not feeling sick
whether they've eaten tripe, that's not going to be very
NOTE CONF
informative.
So what this means is that we're now taking account
NOTE CONF
the probability of the evidence.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We're taking into account the fact that being sick is
more informative for our for the rule we're trying to
NOTE CONF
test than being well.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Remember we didn't have an abstract rule.
We had this concrete rule.
NOTE CONF
If you eat tripe, you will feel sick.
And so the important things are that being sick and
NOTE CONF
the eating tripe.
And um, so now we've turned this into a problem
NOTE CONF
where we reason with probabilities as well.
And the assumption is, at least in this take on
NOTE CONF
the wasting card selection task, is that people always have
probabilities, even if they're implicit, right?
NOTE CONF
They're making assumptions about probabilities because in everyday life there's
always a some degree of certainty or some degree of
NOTE CONF
risk attached to the information that we're dealing with and
attached to the decisions that we make.
NOTE CONF
And you can actually formalise this, and you can make
the assumption that people choose the options P and Q
NOTE CONF
in this case that are most informative for testing this
rule.
NOTE CONF
So the probability of p and q should then affect
the choices, right.
NOTE CONF
Because I'm no longer assuming this is purely a logical
problem, I'm assuming it's a problem about probabilities as well.
NOTE CONF
So if I manipulate the probability of p and q
then people's behaviour should change.
NOTE CONF
And you can actually show this.
So in this plot you have the probability of q
NOTE CONF
here on the y axis, the probability of p on
the x axis, and here the black region where the
NOTE CONF
probability of p is between zero and point two and
sorry of q and the probability of p, um, roughly
NOTE CONF
matches the probability of q.
Uh, is the region where, uh, turning over p and
NOTE CONF
q would be optimal, right?
So the answer is basically p.
NOTE CONF
And q is a good strategy sometimes.
Right.
NOTE CONF
It depends on the probability of p and q.
If the probability of q, for example, becomes too low,
NOTE CONF
then it's a good idea to look at not q
rather than q okay.
NOTE CONF
Because the probability of not q obviously is one minus
the probability of q and Oxford.
NOTE CONF
And later they have a fairly complicated story to do
with the expected information gain and so on.
NOTE CONF
So you can make this mathematically precise, but the intuition
is that the logical story is not the whole story.
NOTE CONF
You need to take into account the probability of the
different forms of evidence as well.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So today we've seen a number of classic experiments to
NOTE CONF
do with decision making.
We've looked at framing effects as you see them in
NOTE CONF
paired lotteries.
We've looked at the representative bias where if the description
NOTE CONF
of of an event or a person is very representative,
then this overrides other evidence, the availability bias, where we
NOTE CONF
go for things that are easily accessible, they are present
in memory or in the environment or in the news.
NOTE CONF
We've seen base rate neglect where people don't take the
prior probability into account and when they reason.
NOTE CONF
And we've seen the waste and card selection task, which
is about how logical reasoning and probabilistic reasoning interact in
NOTE CONF
complicated Ways.
And overall, the enterprise is to try to understand the
NOTE CONF
limits of of rational behaviour, of optimal behaviour and try
to explain why in some situations we behave in a
NOTE CONF
rational, optimal way.
When we make decisions, in other situations we don't.
NOTE CONF
And that's it for today.
And that's also my part of the course.
NOTE CONF
So thank you for your attention.